[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology good evening everyone and
welcome to church history and theology
as we delve into a theological side of
things we're going to pull out a church
history for just a moment and discuss a
Biblical concept cep of the definition
of
saints now if you are a studier of
church history which let's be honest if
you are listening to this podcast uh
listening to this show wherever you are
uh you are a fan of church history you
will undoubtedly and invariably come
across references to St so and so or uh
St Paul or St Augustin or St Patrick and
this term is used in all manner of ways
um but it is used most specifically in
the west as a terminology that is meant
to describe a very specific type of
Christian and it is that that I want to
interact with there is multiple um
definitions of Saint both East and West
in the East is more connected with the
concept of theosis that's a little bit
outside of our purview this uh this
episode but in the west it has much more
of a
a Judicial uh ruling by the church
especially connected to papal power in
the Medieval Era so once we get to those
uh eras and we start to talk about you
know the rise of all of that it's going
to be really important to understand
this episode as background for that
theological background because there
actually is a biblical definition for
Saints um and it's truly important and
it's not one of those things that we
should pass over lightly so
one of the one of the things that you're
going to find is that the common
parlance of Saint is just completely
absent from the scriptures and it is
because the concept of a first class of
Christians and then uh secondary or Ley
class or this whole kind of hierarchy
that develops later on has no place in
the scriptures in no place in the early
church nobody is talking like this uh
the whole idea that there is this this
group of people commonly understood as
as having kind of gone above and beyond
or that they uh have so lived in light
of uh the commands of Christ or of the
law and have presented themselves even
the term Saint comes from the word um to
that means to be holy uh this kind of
set apart um holy person um and that
that kind of whole concept comes much
later uh it is born and connected out of
the concept of the martyrs being a very
particular class of Christian which I
will simply point out once we get to the
cult of the martyrs um and the cult of
relics that that flow in their uh in
their wake um really you're
talking third fourth Century where that
starts and then it explodes after after
the Imperial Church in the 4th Century
um but in the early Century there's no
concept of that Martyrs are being buried
their bones are not being you know
treated as something uniquely holy or
special or anything like that that comes
later on um but when you're when you're
looking at the concept of Saint or the
concept of a Christian or the concept of
being holy one of the most important
things is really going to drive home how
is it that we can come out of the
scriptures with an idea that there are
levels of Christians as if those there
are those who are super Christians or
first class Christians shall we say and
then second class Christians um how is
it that Christians are stated in the New
Testament uh and and also in the Old
Testament but that's a whole another
discussion as being made
holy I I think you will be surprised to
find out uh or maybe not that it is
always expressed in the passive test
they are made holy this is not something
that they accomplish and this is one of
the greatest distinctions that we're
going to have between a later medieval
concept and the biblical concept so
before I get into any of those weeds I
just want to say this is not primarily a
church history lesson tonight is
theology that's why this class is called
church history and theology every once
in a while we will take a break on
church history and discuss something
that's going to be important going
forward because once we start referring
in the in the historical documents to
someone like St Clement or St um St
Justin Martyr St Ignatius um these
terminologies uh need to be clarified
ahead of time uh what I mean them as
when I use them um is not that they are
some thing above someone else they are
servants the same as us all in fact I
want to sandwich this entire uh
discussion with words of Jesus about
this concept and that is on the very
first basis of what Christ teaches us
about this and that is that we are all
servants there's not a single one of us
uh that having accomplished what Christ
has commanded us to do or having
followed the way of the Cross or having
followed the Narrow Path gets to the end
and say oh my goodness that is simply
phenomenal you went above and beyond the
Call of Duty everything is great uh you
know you you have accomplished uh an
excess of Merit that's something that
comes in the you know latter centuries
of the Medieval Era uh and therefore by
the overwhelming Holiness that you are
you have some special place well
wouldn't you know it that uh our savior
actually gives an
entire Parable on this concept it's
called the parable of the Unworthy
servants and it would do us well to
remember this and by by the way if
there's any of you who want to write
books in Theology and you find this kind
of a concept I would simply uh put out
to you that unworthy servants is an
amazing title of a book that somebody
should write if that doesn't already
exists hear this Parable will any one of
you who has a servant plowing or keeping
Sheep by the way this if you're
listening this is Luke 17 7-10 will any
of you who has a servant plowing or
keeping sheep say to him who has uh come
in from the field field come at once and
recline at table will you not rather say
to him prepare supper for me and dress
properly and serve me while I eat and
drink and afterward you will eat and
drink does he think this does he thank
the servant because he did what was
commanded listen to these words from
Jesus so you also he says to all of his
Apostles so you also when you have done
all that you were commanded say we are
unworthy servants we have only only done
what was our
duty I believe the concept of humility
to be the entire backdrop of the
Christian Life if it is not everything
gets out of balance if humility is not
sitting behind every attempt to follow
Christ then we will end up
self-righteous or we will end up in the
ditch because we are actually blind if
we think that on some level we are
matching the Holiness of his commands
his commands are Out Of
Reach his commands are
perfect and if we come across something
that is Holy in our lives we owe that
glory to God for doing that the grace of
God has appeared and it trains us for
righteousness it is not something that
we look deep inside of ourselves and
find Holiness uh that that God did not
put there or God did not develop in US
those things are are things that God has
done and that kind of expresses to us
something a little bit more important
because all of the men that Jesus was
speaking to about this Parable he's
there speaking to his disciples he's
saying look when you've done everything
that you are commanded to do this is
this carries with it the same kind of uh
fervor that that passage uh about when
the disciples went out and they were
casting out demons they came back
leaping and rejoicing they were so happy
they were saying because even the demon
Believe in Us or excuse me even the
demons listen to us because of your name
and then Jesus throws this whole kibos
on that concept and says look don't
don't Rejoice for that Rejoice only in
that your names are recorded in
heaven that that humility of the
Practical pragmatic following of the
Lord should be evident in Christians
lives in fact it's one of those it's one
of those points of maturity that comes
to us where we actually recognize these
things are not our own doing
these things
are these things are part of it part of
God's salvation part of God's plan in
fact it is not even to uh be surprised
to us that this is not even a new
testament concept the term itself is an
Old Testament
term holy
ones it's a rare Old Testament term but
it is an Old Testament term to be sure
in fact you will find it in the Psalms
and you will find it uh also in the Pro
uh in the prophets mostly Daniel that
refers to Those whom God is seen as
feared in their eyes those who truly
believe on the Lord those who have found
favor in his sight are defined as
Saints so let's go to
there Psalm
34:9 oh fear the lord you his Saints for
those who fear Him have no lack or psalm
30:4
sing praises to the Lord oh you his
Saints and give thanks to His holy name
again that terminology that passage is
addressing this idea that the very ones
who are praising the Lord for His holy
name are themselves ones who are
holy now we Define that as Saints why
well it comes from the same root word in
our language Sanctified this idea of
being made holy this idea of one who is
Holy uh the term in Hebrew is just the
word holy but applied to uh per a
individual person or a group of persons
those who are holy holy ones are
Saints you you say well you look at you
look into ancient Israel and you go like
well aren't there levels there right so
you have those who are in the nation of
Israel and then you have saints yeah
there's distinction in the Old Testament
right because not every everyone who's
of the nation of Israel are believers in
the god of Israel sorry to break that to
you they're not all
saved right I mean we have the count of
it during Elijah's life as as as few as
7,000 which was a lot more than Elijah
thought there was but there's not that
many people in the nation of Israel in
the Old Testament days that are actually
true saved
individuals I hope it is not news to you
that salvation has always been the same
way by God's grace and through
faith it's been that way since Genesis
it will be that way to the very end at
the at the uh incoming of the escaton
that is the point that is the focus of
all of these things and so when we see
this in the Old Testament we see really
unique uh laying out of this here and
that those who are truly there fearing
him are called his Saints
right he'll even express it directly in
Psalm 97:
10-2 oh you who love the Lord hate evil
he preserves the lives of his Saints he
delivers them from the hand of the
wicked light is sown for the righteous
and joy for the upright in heart rejoice
in the Lord oh you righteous and give
thanks to His holy name that same
concept he preserves the lives of his
Saints his Saints have are ones who are
holy what what is their relationship to
evil they hate
it right what what is their relationship
to the wicked they need to be delivered
from
them right what what is it that sits in
their heart
righteousness their heart is upright
they are called righteous it is
synonymous this is through and through
in the
Psalms the same thing also is present in
the prophets uh though again in the Old
Testament we're not dealing with a
termin ology that's very common we're
dealing with something that's actually
quite unusual uh but once we get to the
New Testament it just explodes and
rightly so because the the very focus of
Holiness the very focus of how we are
made holy the very focus of all of our
trust and faith has actually been born
as one of
us died in our place was risen again
seen witnessed ascended and is coming
again
all of those things poured together to
show us that the reality is not
incredibly complicated in fact it's
quite
simple Saints are those whom God has
saved it is true in the Old Testament it
is true in the prophets it is true in
the new let's look at the prophets for a
second Daniel chapter 7: 17-22
now Daniel 7 we're dropping right into
the middle of a vision here but it's
really important passage uh with regards
to this topic saying these four great
beasts are Four Kings who shall rise out
of the Earth but the Saints of the most
high shall receive the kingdom and
possess the kingdom forever forever and
ever and then Daniel says I desire to
know the truth about the fourth Beast
which was different from all the rest
exceedingly terrifying with its teeth of
iron and Claws of bronze and which
devoured and broken pieces and stamped
what was left with its feet and about
the 10 horns that were on its head and
the other horn that came up from before
it with three of uh them fell the horn
that had eyes and a mouth that spoke
great things and that seemed greater
than its companions listen here as I
looked this horn made war made war with
the Saints and prevailed over them until
the Ancient of Days came and judgment
was given for the Saints of the most
high and the time came when the saints
possessed the kingdom now I do not want
to get into the interpretation of these
things you can follow along my up and
cominging uh Sunday school lesson on the
Old Testament backgrounds of the Book of
Revelation if you want to hear my uh
dealings with this passage um but here
we have this this expression this
understanding that there are the Saints
who are seen in a different class from
just a citizen of Israel in the Old
Testament what has
happened after the uh the first Advent
of our Lord and savior is that that
understanding that there is a unique
group that are super holy and then
there's everyone else has been imported
directly into the New Testament Church
as though we have that same layering
that is seen in the nation of Israel we
don't that's one of the things that
makes the New Covenant in the New
Testament so much better it is not about
ethnicity it is not about family lineage
it is not about who your parents are
this is one of the reasons why I I do
not um I do not hold to certain parts of
the covenantal theology because it seems
to miss this point one of the great
things about the New Covenant is that it
is not tied to families and
Bloodlines one of the most marvelous
aspects about this is that every single
one of us is Saints
we actually see that there are those who
were truly Israel were those who were
changed in heart and mind those who
feared the Lord and turned away from
Evil the same thing is said of the
entire church this is who we are and so
as an Old Testament term it settles in
the back of our minds and we need to
actually Define the concept answer the
question who is Holy
who is
Holy you know your answer to that
question tells me where you will end up
on this concept of Saint or
Sanctified who is actually
holy now you may take the theological
Bend and say well God Alone is Holy okay
yeah God has a very unique Holiness all
to his own self absolutely his glory he
doesn't share with another and
yet there are those called holy
ones and so there is a creature Holiness
that is gifted I would simply say there
a gifted creature Holiness that is to be
found in certain creatures what is it
and who are
they and how did they get that way right
because if we already take Jesus's words
in Luke 17 and see this concept that
those who are following the Lord and
just doing everything they're
told if that's if that's the basis of
being this Sanctified holy topof the
line best of all of this he wouldn't be
coming back and saying we are unworthy
and we are only servants and we have
only done what is our duty there should
be something we should expect to see
something far more than that there but
we don't what we see is that we no
matter how much we have accomplished in
the body if it is measured only by what
we have done we are
unworthy this is the essence of
salvation by
grace God does these things who is Holy
in the
church all who are
Sanctified you say oh my goodness uh
does that mean everyone who has all of
their works completely uh accurate they
don't sin anymore I didn't say that
there's no such thing as a Christian
doesn't sin
anymore unless they're dead
but in this life
no in this life Christians
wrestle in this life Christians
confess in this life Christians repent
and turn back to Christ over and over
again we live as John Calvin says a life
of
repentance it is who we are as as John
says in 1 John chapter 1 that if we say
that we have no sin we we lie we do not
practice the truth if we confess our
sins he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness make us
holy the term Sanctified in the New
Testament comes from the exact same
root
holy
aiat I want you to see
it here in 1 Corinthians chapter
1 we start to build this case for who it
is that is Holy who is a saint who is
Sanctified by the way they're all the
same
terminology to the Church of God that is
in Corinth to those watch this list
Sanctified in Christ Jesus notice notice
the passive
tense right notice that it or excuse me
the passive mood notice it is not in the
OR tense no I was right notice is not in
the
active it doesn't say to those who
sanctify themselves well actually that'd
be middle uh to those
who
um yeah actually there's no way you even
say it in the active uh it's it's simply
here those Sanctified in Christ Jesus it
is something that is done it is done to
them watch this those who are Sanctified
in Christ Jesus called to be Saints
together with all those who every place
call upon the name of the Lord of our
Lord Jesus Christ both their lord and
ours in fact there's really no more
efficient way to draw the line all
Christians all Christians are Sanctified
all Christians here in the Church of
Corinth now if you know anything about
the letter to the Church of Corinth here
the first one you know that that is a an
amazing statement because here he is
calling these Christians Sanctified in
Christ Jesus that they are called to be
s Saints not called to be Saints as
though it's like a a higher calling to
them no they are called to be Saints
they are that together with all those
who in every place call upon the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ how far does that
go everywhere to
everyone wherever the Lord is
Lord you say I don't know is that is
that exactly what's going on here yeah
that's ex exactly what's going on here
turned Hebrews chapter 10 where if
you're on the video thing and you or if
you're on the watching on the video
you're able to actually just view it
straight up because I have it here on
the screen Hebrews chapter 10:
9-4 watch then he added behold I have
come to do your will and he does away
with the first in order to establish the
second and by that will we have been
Sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all now
before I finish this section I want to I
want to help us understand a little bit
more because I you know I kind of grew
up with this idea that that salvation
and justification was on the Lord and
sanctification was up to me I don't know
if any of you else shared that
experience or shared that uh pride of
mine but it is something that the
scriptures have gone a long way to just
absolutely rid me of and and say I I
there there's just literally nothing I
add to this because any of this
sanctification is not something that I
can simply accomplish this is something
that through faith in Christ he must
develop in
me he active me
passive watch what he does and he does
this through his own sacrifice verse 11
Hebrews chapter 10 and every priest
stands daily at his sacrifice offering
repeatedly the same sacrifices which can
never take away sins but when Christ had
offered for all time a single sacrifice
for sins he sat down at the right hand
of God waiting from that time until his
enemies should be made a foot stol for
his feet for by a single offering he has
perfected for all time those who are
being
Sanctified being made
holy those who in heart in Soul and in
action and intention and in mind are
being made holy now there is there is a
whole split here and I think it's
important to point out a whole split
here between what has already been
accomplished and what is being
accomplished now one of the great things
about the scripture is that it talks
about the future in ways that are so
solid because it's fully aware that the
one who made these
promises is sure and so you can speak of
future realities in the past tense such
as for for instance the golden shade of
redemption found at the end of Romans
chapter 8 where it expresses that Those
whom he called excuse me Those whom he
fornew he called Those whom he called he
predestined Those whom he predestined he
justified Those whom he justified he
glorified notice glorified is in the
past
tense even though that that is like for
99% of that that is future still and yet
it is so solid the promise and that
whole section is all about there's
nothing that can separate us from the
love of God that's in Christ Jesus but
there is there is a excuse me there is a
expression to this is saying there is a
certain amount of sanctification that is
taking place will take place and then in
the ultimate sense our identity as
Sanctified ones our identity as holy
ones will come to full awareness and
fruition at the very end
not by our death but after our
death so there is a past tense to it
there is a real sense to it in the
ultimate sense Sanctified ones holy ones
these
Christians are
holy watch what he says here at a later
point in Hebrews
13 Hebrews 13:
11-13 for the bodies of those animals
whose blood is brought into the holy
places by the high priest as a sacrifice
for sin are burned outside the camp so
Jesus also suffered outside the gate
watch this in order to sanctify the
people through his own
blood sanctify
means to make
holy to justify means to make righteous
to sanctify means to make
holy the outcome of this is verse 13
there in Chapter 13 therefore let us go
to him outside the camp and bear the
reproach he
endured in other words this identity of
who we are as holy
ones spills over into our lives
practically everyone gets this backwards
you do not earn the identity of holy
ones by doing holy things you do holy
things because you have been
Sanctified that way the glory stays with
the
Lord and we having become partakers of
Life learn this so who is
Holy every Christian is Holy through
faith in
Christ you want to see it it let's see
it the first place that we see this is
found in 2 Thessalonians chap 2: 13 to
14 this is where the Apostle Paul
expresses but we ought
also excuse me but we ought always to
give thanks to God for you Brothers
beloved by the Lord because God chose
you as the first fruits to be saved
through sanctification by the spirit and
belief in the truth there we have the
terminology of Salvation we have the
terminology of faith we have the
terminology of Truth and right there
being made holy sanctification right in
the center of it as he says to this he
called you through our gospel so that
you may obtain the glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ and there's even the
glorification at the end of it all that
whole expression is written to
church just like the church in 1
Corinthians chapter 1 that expresses to
them all that they are Saints
the book of Philippians says the same
thing in fact almost all of Paul's
introductions to these entire churches
calls all of them without disclaimer
Saints all of
them look at the opening to Philippians
Philippians chapter 1 vers1 Paul and
Timothy Servants of Christ Jesus to all
the saints in Christ Jesus who are at
Philippi with the overseers and deacons
he says at the very end of the book of
Philippians chapter 4: 21 and 22 greet
every saint in Christ Jesus the brothers
who are with me greet you all the saints
greet you especially those of Caesar's
household the expression is not possible
to be more all-encompassing to state
that in the presence here whether or not
there's distinctions being made as to
those who are overseers or deacons or
those who are in Caesar's household or
those who are the brothers who are with
me the overarching terminology is all
the saints every saint all the saints
everyone here is
Saint you say well maybe he's just
describing the the leaders of the church
maybe that's what he's doing he's just
describing the leaders of the church no
look at Ephesians
4 he gave the
Apostle to equip the
saints that means these ones that are
holy these holy
ones
these
Saints still need to be equipped why for
the work of Ministry for building up the
body of Christ until we all attain to
the unity of the faith and of the
knowledge of the Son of God to mature
manhood that means it is possible in
fact nay I would say likely normal and
typical that Saints who are Saints are
also so
immature in
fact he even says further on In this
passage that the reason why teachers
pastors are given to the church the
reason why the apostles and the prophets
and the evangelists have their testimony
codified in the scriptures the reason
why these things exist is that we may
mature as Christians as Saints so that
we may no longer be
children I mean he defines the whole
thing in this passage tossed to and fro
by the waves and carried about by every
wind of Doctrine by human cunning and
craftiness and deceitful schemes rather
speaking the truth and love we are to
grow up in every way into him who is the
head into
Christ Saints is not a terminology for
some super uber
Christian Saint is a terminology to
describe every single
Christian every single person who who
has placed their faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ has found salvation in him who is
Justified who is being
Sanctified who is
Sanctified all of these terminologies
mixed
together are
Saints without
exception you should Christian take
great Solace from the fact that the
scriptures save this terminology for
those who believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ
you are those who are
holy behave like
it you say well I don't feel holy
okay the scriptures aren't about your
feelings it expresses to you who you are
by Birthright you have come to S saving
faith in Christ Jesus you are his holy
bride he
sanctifies his church
and the church is Sanctified by her
groom it is one of these things
that it frustrates me when
I when I see people talking in church
history and in the
scriptures of just other Christians as
if they are on pedestals so
high and it causes us to be led astray
by people who will let us
down it causes us to place our extended
faith into the righteousness the
Practical righteousness lived
out of fallible
humans humans in this
life Saints or not Christians are not
will let you
down pastors will fail
Saint such and so you only think highly
of him because you didn't know him
personally I promise
you most of these
people you probably would not
like a few of them you might just by
happen stance but they are not perfect
they are
not Uber
righteous they are unworthy servants
same as me same as
you and those who are most mature would
actually recognize
that it's painful to hear
Christians
speak in a dismissive
way to the work of Christ in their
life and then to call it
humility it is not humble to think less
of yourself than Christ
does it's
lying it is not
humble to take an identity of Sinner
over
Saint we are Justified we still sin but
we are
Saints it is a tremendous
truth it is a Wonder wonderful reality
and it is something that sets us up to
recognize our identity as Sons and
Daughters of Our Father who is in heaven
and then we live out of that
knowledge we are not trying to earn
sainthood you can't any more than you
can earn salvation you can't earn
this this is given to every Christian
if you doubt it let's hear Jesus's
thoughts on the man last passage here
and one of the
best it's in Acts chapter 26 and you may
go wait what in the world what are we
doing with Jesus's words here ah they're
quoted by the Apostle Paul but I want
you to see something
here Luke recounts this
and Paul is expressing this uh as he
stands before the king in this
connection he says I journeyed to
Damascus with the authority and
commission of the chief priests at
midday oh King I saw on the way a light
from Heaven brighter than the sun has
Shone around me and those who journeyed
with me and when we had all Fallen to
the ground I Heard a Voice saying to me
in the Hebrew language Saul Saul why are
you persecuting me it is hard for you to
kick against the
goats and I said who are you Lord and he
said I am Jesus whom you are persecuting
but rise and stand upon your feet for I
have appeared to you for this purpose to
appoint you as a servant and a witness
to the things in which you have seen me
and to those in which I will appear to
you delivering you from your people and
from the Gentiles to whom I am sending
you now watch watch watch what he's
sending him to do in verse 18 here to
open their eyes so that they may turn
from Darkness to light from the power of
Satan to God that they may receive
forgiveness of sins and a place among
those who are Sanctified by faith in
me if after this whole study you can't
appreciate the weight of that promise
that in their forgiveness they are given
a place among those who are Saints
because of their Reliance in him because
of his grace in giving them their faith
in gifting them their repentance This Is
Our God who makes his people holy This
Is Our God who is able to save to the
uttermost and so the question comes to
us as we look through church history as
we continue Contin on into the history
of the church when we see people
referred to as Saints when I refer to
them simply because of common parlance
always understand I am only referring to
them that way in a way of identification
familiarity I am not an any way a part
of the belief that this is some super
righteous person or super Sanctified
person or super holy person
no we all have been given all things
pertaining to life and godliness we all
have been gifted the righteousness
because of our hunger and thirst for it
Christ has gifted his own righteousness
we are all Justified we are all
Sanctified we will all be glorified and
it is simply a remarkable promise of the
Christian Life and I want you to be
encouraged in it and before we go on any
further in church history I thought it
was important for me to cover
it and now we have the answer to the
question who is Holy and who are Saints
the answer is all Christians are Saints
All Saints are
Christians to the glory of
God I'll see you next time
[Music]
[Applause]
for